##Hincmar of Rheims' De Divortio
Hincmar, et al. The Divorce of King Lothar and Queen Theutberga: Hincmar of Rheimss De Divortio. Manchester University Press, 2016.

"Concerning where it is written that the king grieved over the deed and that this sad action greatly displeased him, he must take care
(may it not happen) his grief 'might not be the washing away of a wicked deed, but its confession 123. For this is', as the doctors of the
Church write, and the venerable priest Bede says, following their judgement.124 
'the justice of heavenly judgement, that often the wicked both recognize and confess that they have gone astray, and bear a certain penitence for their error, but yet they do not rest from going astray. So by that same confession and repentance they give witness against themselves, that they do not commit the offence unknowingly, when they refuse to restrain themselves from the sin that they censure. They perish the more justly, since they neglected to turn away from the pit of perdition that they were able to forsee.'

"Therefore it is written about Herod, that 'the king was saddened' by the request of Herodias (Matthew 14:9).
'But indeed Herod's sadness was such as was the repentance of the Pharaoh and Judas, each of whom in madness added to their misdeeds after they had unwillingly betrayed themselves by the accusation of their conscience. Thus Herod, asking for John's head, simulated sadness on his face, and so condemned himself, by showing openly to all that he knew him to be innocent and holy whom he was about to hand over to be killed. In truth, if we peer carefully into that wicked heart, it was secretly rejoicing, for what was sought he would have done earlier had there been an excuse. For if the head of Herodias had been requested, there can be no doubt he would not have wished to give it and, genuinely sad, would have refused it.'

..."Concerning the fact that the king declared that he had accepted a false judgement as a truthful examination while himself knowing the truth, we know that we shall have to give a very precise account for all our judgements to the most equitable judge, King of kings, and that which we percieve we must declare, without respect of persons, compelled by truth. That is, since he (Lothar) dared to act contrary to legal decree and the Gospel truth which says: "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thu God' (Deuteronomy 6:16), who, as is again written, ‘scorneth the scorners' (Proverbs 3:34), so he should accept and accomplish worthy penance as a sacrilegious man, who acted in contempt and by deceit against the holy sacraments. And those who consented to his action, if there were any, should be subjected to legal and ecclesiastical judgements. 

'As for the rest that follows on from there, that this woman in accordance with her many requests was commanded to purge herself through the satisfaction of public pennance. if, placed in legal judgement, she rationally and justly escaped it, by kind equity or the piety of forgiveness, this (penance) would have been good in every respect, so long as the permission to separate was not made a stumbling block for the weak, against the apostle, and she did not make her husband commit adultery. For otherwise, she and her supporters ought to have heard the words of the apostle, 'Ye ask and recieve not, because ye ask amiss'(James 4:3). But since then she had accused herself in writing in front of the king and noble laymen, as according to the Roman law anyone can accuse another under the conditions set by these laws.
